So what about other stuff
that the browser knows?
How about, does it know what time it's
[LAUGH] any BoJack correspond fans?
[LAUGH], what time is it now .com?
Okay, [LAUGH],
the browser has a concept of time,
which gives JavaScript a concept of time.
But we're gonna be putting a pin
in this for a little bit later.
There is a capital D date object,
everything is an object.
We'll talk about that more later, too.
That we can use with the new constructor
to get an instance of a date.
A little preview of some
object-oriented programming,
which represents the current
moment in this thing we call time.
And the date object that
I get from calling new
Date comes with some handy-dandy tools.
For example,
we have date to string on objects.
Well, in this case, we have
a special one called, toDateString,
which gives me a kind
of high-level overview.
If it's a Tuesday,
it's November 20th, etc.
And then we also get a toLocaleDateString,
which knows that I have my
browser set to English US locale,
and in the US we put the month,
and then a slash.
And then the day, and
then a slash, and then the year,
even though the rest of the world
thinks that that's bonkers.
[LAUGH], in any case,
you'll also see that used a lot in
sites where you know you have
an international audience.
And you wanna make sure you're displaying
things in their expected format,
because otherwise those early periods
of the year get very confusing for
the international crowd.
Okay, so
also without the new constructor we can
call a method on the capital
D date object called now,
we can call Date.now, and
it gives us the very helpful
value of one trillion or
something milliseconds.
Yeah, all of my refs are this dated.
Okay, [LAUGH], the ridiculously large and
unhelpful number there is
milliseconds since the epoch,
which we could have a whole other course
on talking about how that all happened.
But in any case, it's basically,
a number of milliseconds that
computers can interpret and
figure out what that corresponds to
in something resembling human time.
I say this with a lot of caveats
because time is a construct.
We're all experiencing it differently and
computers think that everything
is happening right now.
So, anyway, we can, however,
use this very unhelpful
human readable value for
helpful things like timing stuff.
So, for example,
if I grab Date.now as the start and
then I do some really long complicated
blocking synchronous separation.
And then I call date on now again and
say that is the end time,
I can tell what's
the difference between the two.
And I can find how many seconds or
whatever milliseconds it took for
this thing to run.
So that can be useful.
But we also have a fun little
built-in timer on the console object.
Have folks used console.time?
This is a fun one that it's not
100% reliable, of course, but for
general purpose, none of this stuff is.
Don't trust JavaScript
when it comes to time.
But, [LAUGH], this can be useful for
a high-level idea of whether things
are moving along as you expect.
So I can start a new timer by calling
console.time with the name of this timer.
And that's just an arbitrary
string that I choose.
So in this case,
I'll start one called stopwatched.
And then I will runAround,
in my mind, because I hate running.
And then I can call
.timelog on the console and
pass in the same ID for this timer,
which again, was what I chose, stopwatch.
And it will tell me how many milliseconds
that timer has been running.
And I can then maybe even set
another timer, like a lap timer.
So for example, create a new
console.time with a different ID.
So I now have a different timer,
which then I can do more stuff.
And then I could maybe stop that
timer totally by calling .timeend
with my given ID that I'm interested in,
in this case lap.
And now the console will tell me,
okay, the lap took this long and
the timer is done.
I'm not paying attention to lap anymore.
That's we're done, we're past it.
And then the stopwatch timer is still
running at this point because I haven't
called .timeend.
So once I do that, we'll see,
a much larger value for
a timer that's been running for longer.
So anyway, time, it's fun, especially
when you can only count in milliseconds.
So get used to a lot of divide by
a thousand, or multiply by a thousand,
or whatever.
All righty, but console has some
other fun tricks up its sleeve.
So again, poke around to see what else
you got on that console object in there.
But there is another concept
of timers that JavaScript and,
well, I should say the browser has,
which are timeouts.
So try this out as we go in the console.
If we log something,
we expect to see it right away, right?
But if we call the built-in
function set timeout,
and we pass in a callback function,
in this case,
we're doing the little anonymous
fat arrow that we saw a minute ago.
And we log something in that function,
the second argument to set timeout
is a delay, in guess what unit?
In milliseconds, because everything's
milliseconds in our world,
because we're a browser.
And we just see time stretch
infinitely in front of us.
Anyway, so basically the way set timeout
works is I give it a function to run.
I give it a delay after which I
want it to try to run the function.
We're gonna get back to our
whole event loop situation.
And what happens then,
if I have the next line in my program,
also just be a regular console log.
So, if people try running this code,
I'm just gonna copy it.
What do you think?
Will this last one print before or
after this one second later?
>> Before.
>> Before, okay.
Immediately, I don't know
let's see what is immediate.
Okay, so if we do this,
we get it immediately.
But if we run like these two right after
one another, it does print immediately.
And then about one second later this runs.
And if you are capable in your
mind of not having the SpongeBob
name one second later in your
head then you are a different
brain than me because that's all I can
can ever think of with these things.
Many hours later, okay.
>> Excuse me.
>> Yes.
>> Where does the set timeout method live?
What is that?
>> What is that?
Shall we ask our friend?
>> Yeah.
>> Let's ask our best friend,
every web dev's best friend, BFF,
type in the thing that
we're curious about.
SetTimeout, global function, okay?
Also available in web workers,
outside of the scope of this course.
So basically the setTimeout
function is a global
variable in the JavaScript
client side runtime
that gives us access to this
browser API under the hood
that the browser is managing
of maintaining these timeouts.
And so, we can read a lot
more about timeouts in here.
But again,
this is one of those things that
the browser is doing
outside of JavaScript.
And it has this notion of a timer.
So, it sees the call, or JavaScript has
this function on the stack that says,
setTimeout with some callback function.
And then the browser is,
you wanted me to set a timeout.
And then remember that that's the function
I'm supposed to run that callback you
just gave me.
Okay, cool.
Start the timer [SOUND].
It's been 1000 milliseconds or whatever.
Now you should be ready to
run that callback function.
So the browser pushes that into the queue
to be processed as quickly as possible,
and this is why I keep saying
it runs about a second later.
It runs about immediately.
Because again, there could be all
kinds of other stuff happening.
So really,
when we're setting a timeout, and
using similar API's which we'll see in
a second, the delay is not precise.
The delay is essentially a minimum.
It's telling the browser,
wait 1000 seconds or
milliseconds and
then schedule this function to be run.
So put this callback function into the
queue in a little message to JavaScript.
And then only once the call stack
is empty and that message is
the front of the queue is that
callback actually gonna get run.
So it might be 2,000 milliseconds later.
If somebody else was doing
something else that blocked
the call stack for
a second, one whole second.
So this is why we have very fuzzy
notions of when things are happening,
because the browser's doing
all kinds of other stuff.
What do we think we're the most
important person in the browser's life?
It doesn't have anything else better to
do than just listen for our commands and
execute them immediately?
Whoa, browser.
All right, but it's kind of fair,
there's other things happening.
So this is why be careful with timeouts.
Don't trust them as an exact time and
same with console.time and all this stuff.
Nothing in JavaScript,
[LAUGH] time-wise, is certain really.
Although they're working on it.
That standards body that I mentioned is
working on a new alternative to date.now.
So hopefully, one day,
we'll have easier time as web developers.
But anyway, for now, when we set timeouts,
it's essentially a minimum, minimum delay.
Just keep that in mind.
We can also cancel timeouts.
Sometimes got a rocket launch
planned as one does these days.
Cuz that's what JavaScript is for, right?
Launching rockets.
And let's say we have a countdown timeout.
And this bears mentioning,
sometimes it's useful to keep the return
value of the set timeout function.
And if we look at what that value is,
if we log this countdown variable
we've stored it in, it's some number.
And it'll depend on how many
other timers are going, whatever.
But essentially,
each running JavaScript process will
give it an ID that can't be confused for
any other timer.
And we can use that ID to then clear or
cancel the timeout if we need to.
So if somebody smashes that abort button,
for example,
then we want to clear this time out and
not have liftoff.
So this is also kind of mirrored in
a very similar API called intervals.
So similar to timeout,
where we're essentially saying,
okay, wait this long and
then try to run this function.
With an interval, we're saying, wait this
long and then try to run this function,
and then wait that long again,
and then try to run it again, and
then wait that long again and
try to run it again forever.
Or until we run clear interval on the ID
of the timeout we want to run.
Now, be careful with these things.
If you're setting an interval to
do some very long or expensive or,
yeah, I don't know, operation, and
you're doing it every second,
you might not be having a good time.
But sometimes that is
exactly what you want.
Yes, and so back to our concept again,
just to review that terminology or
jargon, cuz let's keep in mind that
these are all just arbitrary words that
we made up to refer to these things.
However, in the community, you will see
words thrown around like blocking code,
synchronous, asynchronous,
non-blocking, yada, yada.
So essentially, as a recap,
if there weren't this whole process
of the event loop being able to
queue up things into JavaScript.
Then JavaScript would basically
have to block its execution until
the current thing was done.
And we wouldn't be able to do anything
else with the browser if we were running
a timeout, let's say.
Or we wouldn't have a timeout
because that's a browser thing.
But if we were doing
a very long complex task.
So the event loop helps us avoid blocking
the the browser's interactivity and
being able to respond to
other stuff that's going on.
But we've all had the experience
probably in our lives of some
page that is indeed freezing
up our whole browser.
We can't do anything and so
our goal forever, and to today,
and in the future, is to not do that, and
to give users a responsive experience
by managing time consciously.
So this is just the beginning of
what could be said about this,
but TLDR, a blocking code, less good.
Non-blocking code, and that's where
our async friends come in, excellent.
Drake approves.
So you know it's good.